Quantum autoencoders for efﬁcient compression of quantum data
Jonathan Romero, 1 Jonathan P. Olson, 1 and Alan Aspuru-Guzik 1,∗
1Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, United States
(Dated: February 14, 2017)
Classical autoencoders are neural networks that can learn efﬁcient low dimensional representations of data in
higher dimensional space. The task of an autoencoder is, given an input x, is to map x to a lower dimensional
pointy such thatx can likely be recovered fromy. The structure of the underlying autoencoder network can be
chosen to represent the data on a smaller dimension, effectively compressing the input. Inspired by this idea,
we introduce the model of a quantum autoencoder to perform similar tasks on quantum data. The quantum au-
toencoder is trained to compress a particular dataset of quantum states, where a classical compression algorithm
cannot be employed. The parameters of the quantum autoencoder are trained using classical optimization algo-
rithms. We show an example of a simple programmable circuit that can be trained as an efﬁcient autoencoder.
We apply our model in the context of quantum simulation to compress ground states of the Hubbard model and
molecular Hamiltonians.
I. INTRODUCTION
Quantum technologies, ranging from quantum computing
to quantum cryptography, have been found to have increas-
ingly powerful applications for a modern society. Quantum
simulators for chemistry, for example, have been recently
shown to be capable of efﬁciently calculating molecular en-
ergies for small systems [1]; the capability for larger scale
simulations promises to have deep implications for materials
design, pharmacological research, and an array of other poten-
tially life-changing functions [2]. A limiting factor for nearly
all of these applications, however, is the amount of quantum
resources that can be realized in an experiment. Therefore, for
experiments now and in the near future, any tool which can re-
duce the experimental overhead in terms of these resources is
especially valuable.
For classical data processing, machine learning via an au-
toencoder is one such tool for dimensional reduction [3–5], as
well as having application in generative data models [6]. A
classical autoencoder is a function whose parameters are opti-
mized across a training set of data which, given an(n +k)-bit
input string x, attempts to reproduce x. Part of the speciﬁ-
cation of the circuit, however, is to erase some k bits during
the process. If an autoencoder is successfully trained to repro-
ducex at the output at least approximately, then the remaining
n bits immediately after the erasure (referred to as the latent
space) represent a compressed encoding of the stringx. Thus,
the circuit “learns” to encode information that is close to the
training set.
In this paper, we introduce the concept of a quantum au-
toencoder which is inspired by this design for an input ofn+k
qubits. Because quantum mechanics is able to generate pat-
terns with properties (e.g. superposition and entanglement)
that is beyond classical physics, a quantum computer should
also be able to recognize patterns that are beyond the capabil-
ities of classical machine learning. Thus, the motivation for a
quantum autoencoder is simple; such a model allows us to per-
form analogous machine learning tasks for quantum systems
∗ Corresponding author: aspuru@chemistry.harvard.edu
Figure 1. a) A graphical representation of a 6-bit autoencoder with
a 3-bit latent space. The mapE encodes a 6-bit input (red dots) into
a 3-bit intermediate state (yellow dots), after which the decoder D
attempts to reconstruct the input bits at the output (green dots). b)
Circuit implementation of a 6-3-6 quantum autoencoder.
without exponentially costly classical memory, for instance,
in dimension reduction of quantum data. A related work
proposing a quantum autoencoder model establishes a formal
connection between classical and quantum feedforward neural
networks where a particular setting of parameters in the quan-
tum network reduces to a classical neural network exactly [7].
In this work, we provide a simpler model which we believe
more easily captures the essence of an autoencoder, and ap-
ply it to ground states of the Hubbard model and molecular
Hamiltonians.
arXiv:1612.02806v2  [quant-ph]  10 Feb 2017
2
II. QUANTUM AUTOENCODER MODEL
In analogy with the model of classical autoencoders, the
quantum network has a graphical representation consisting of
an interconnected group of nodes. In the graph of the quantum
network, each node represents a qubit, with the ﬁrst layer of
the network representing the input register and the last layer
representing the output register. In our representation, the
edges connecting adjacent layers represent a unitary transfor-
mation from one layer to the next. Autoencoders, in partic-
ular, shrink the space between the ﬁrst and second layer, as
depicted in Figure 1a.
For a quantum circuit to embody an autoencoder network,
the information contained in some of the input nodes must
be discarded after the initial “encoding” E. We imagine this
takes place by tracing over the qubits representing these nodes
(in Figure 1b, this is represented by a measurement on those
qubits). Fresh qubits (initialized to some reference state) are
then prepared and used to implement the ﬁnal “decoding” evo-
lutionD, which is then compared to the initial state.
The learning task for a quantum autoencoder is to ﬁnd uni-
taries which preserve the quantum information of the input
through the smaller intermediate latent space. To this end, it
is important to quantify the deviation from the initial input
state,|ψi⟩, to the output,ρout
i . Here, we will use the expected
ﬁdelity [8] F (|ψi⟩,ρout
i ) =⟨ψi|ρout
i |ψi⟩. We thus describe
a successful autoencoding as one in whichF (|ψi⟩,ρout
i )≈ 1
for all the input states.
A more formal description of a quantum autoencoder fol-
lows: Let{pi,|ψi⟩AB} be an ensemble of pure states onn+k
qubits, where subsystems A andB are comprised of n andk
qubits, respectively. Let{U⃗ p} be a family of unitary operators
acting onn +k qubits, where⃗ p={p1,p 2,... } is some set of
parameters deﬁning a unitary quantum circuit. Also let |a⟩B′
be some ﬁxed pure reference state of k qubits. Using classi-
cal learning methods, we wish to ﬁnd the unitary U⃗ pwhich
maximizes the average ﬁdelity, which we deﬁne to be the cost
function,
C1(⃗ p) =
∑
i
pi·F (|ψi⟩,ρout
i,⃗ p), (1)
where,
ρout
i,⃗ p= (U⃗ p)†
AB′ TrB
[
U⃗ p
AB
[
ψiAB⊗aB′
]
(U⃗ p
AB)†
]
(U⃗ p)AB′ ,
(2)
and we have abbreviated|ψi⟩⟨ψi|AB =ψiAB and|a⟩⟨a|B′ =
aB′. Equivalently, the goal is to ﬁnd the best unitary U⃗ p
which, on average, best preserves the input state of the cir-
cuit in Figure 2 where instead of tracing over the B system,
we employ a swap gate and trace over theB′ system.
To prove this, consider the ﬁdelity of the input and output
of the entire system of Figure 2 for some ﬁxed ⃗ pwhere we
Figure 2. A quantum autoencoder circuit. The goal is to ﬁnd ⃗ psuch
that the averagedF (|ψ⟩i,ρ out
i,⃗ p) is maximized.
have denoted the swap operation by the unitaryV ,
F (|ψi⟩AB⊗|a⟩B′,U†
ABVBB ′UAB|ψi⟩AB⊗|a⟩B′) =
F (UAB|ψi⟩AB⊗|a⟩B′,VBB ′UAB|ψi⟩AB⊗|a⟩B′) =
F (|ψ′
i⟩AB⊗|a⟩B′,VBB ′|ψ′
i⟩AB⊗|a⟩B′) =
F (|ψ′
i⟩AB⊗|a⟩B′,|ψ′
i⟩AB′⊗|a⟩B), (3)
where we have denoted U|ψi⟩ =|ψ′
i⟩. The terms in the cost
function are found by tracing out over theB′ system,
F (TrB′[ψ′
iAB⊗a′
B
], TrB′[ψ′
iAB′⊗aB]) =
F (ψ′
iAB,ρ′
A⊗aB), (4)
where ρ′
A = TrB′|ψ′
i⟩⟨ψ′
i|AB′]. However, consider instead
tracing over theAB system and looking at the “trash system”
ofB′,
F (TrAB
[
ψ′
iAB⊗a′
B
]
, TrAB
[
ψ′
iAB′⊗aB
]
) =
F (|a⟩B′,ρ′
B′), (5)
whereρ′
B′ = TrA[|ψ′
i⟩⟨ψ′
i|AB′]. We henceforth refer to ρ′
B′
as the “trash state” of the circuit. It is straightforward to see
in the above circuit that perfect ﬁdelity (i.e. C1 = 1) can be
achieved by a unitaryU if and only if, for alli:
U|ψi⟩AB =|ψc
i⟩A⊗|a⟩B . (6)
where|ψc
i⟩A is some compressed version of|ψi⟩. This follows
because, if theB andB′ systems are identical when the swap
occurs, the entire circuit reduces to the identity map. How-
ever, this occurs precisely when the trash state is equal to the
reference state, i.e., F (|a⟩B′,ρ′
B′) = 1 . This implies that it
is possible to accomplish the learning task of ﬁnding the ideal
U⃗ pby training only on the trash state . Furthermore, because
Eq. (6) is completely independent ofU†, this suggests that the
circuit of Figure 2 can be reduced further. We then consider
an alternative deﬁnition of the cost function in terms of the
trash state ﬁdelity,
C2(⃗ p) =
∑
i
pi·F (TrA
[
U⃗ p|ψi⟩⟨ψi|AB (U⃗ p)†
]
,|a⟩B), (7)
Note, however, that the cost functions of Eq. (1) and Eq. (7)
are not in general the same (in fact, C1≤ C2). However, in
practice, one must consider resource limitations; it is not hard
to see that preparing copies of a ﬁxed reference state would be
easier than requiring identical copies of the input state to use
in a SW AP test on the entire output state. For some applica-
tions of a quantum autoencoder, it may also be the case that
3
(a)
 (b)
Figure 3. Two programmable circuits employed as autoencoder models: a) Circuit A: a network of all the possible two-qubit gates (denoted by
Ui) among the qubits. b) Circuit B: a network comprising all the possible controlled general single-qubit rotations (denoted by R i) in a qubit
set, plus single qubit rotations at the beginning and at the end of the unit-cell. All the circuits are depicted in the case of a four-qubit input.
The unit-cell is delimited by the red dotted line.
one has limited access to or limited knowledge of the input
state.
It is interesting to note that, if we only care about circuits
whereC2≈ 1, we can re-imagine the problem to being one
of ﬁnding a particular disentangling. It has been shown that,
employing a circuit of exponential depth, one is always able
to perform a disentangling operation [9], but to perform this
operation in constant or polynomial depth is hard, and so clas-
sical heuristics are often used to ﬁnd quantum circuits that are
as close to optimal as possible. Also, information-theoretic
bounds have been explored in this context before, both in
the context of one-shot compression and one-shot decoupling
[10, 11]. However, because the heuristics involved in choos-
ing efﬁcient-to-implement families of unitaries are largely ad-
hoc, it is difﬁcult to say if these bounds are meaningful in the
context of a quantum autoencoder.
III. IMPLEMENTATION OF THE QUANTUM
AUTOENCODER MODEL
To implement the quantum autoencoder model on a quan-
tum computer we must deﬁne the form of the unitary, U⃗ p
(Eq. (2)) and decompose it into a quantum circuit suitable for
optimization. For the implementation to be efﬁcient, the num-
ber of parameters and the number of gates in the circuit should
scale polynomially with the number of input qubits. This re-
quirement immediately eliminates the possibility of using a
(n +k)-qubit general unitary as U⃗ pdue to the exponential
scaling in the number of parameters needed to generate them.
One alternative for the generation ofU⃗ pis to employ a pro-
grammable quantum circuit [12, 13]. This type of circuit con-
struction consists of a ﬁxed networks of gates, where a poly-
nomial number of parameters associated to the gates i.e. rota-
tion angles, constitute ⃗ p. The pattern deﬁning the network of
gates is regarded as a unit-cell. This unit-cell can ideally be
repeated to increase the ﬂexibility of the model. For the nu-
merical assessment presented in this work, we employed two
simple programmable circuits illustrated in Figure 3.
Circuit A has a unit-cell comprising a network of general
two-qubit gates where we have considered all the possible
pairings between qubits, as illustrated in Figure 3a for the
four-qubit case. Accordingly, this model requires 15n(n−
1)/2 training parameters per unit-cell. A network of arbi-
trary two qubit gates can be easily implemented using state of
the art superconducting qubit technologies [14] and the stan-
dard decomposition of a two-qubit gate into three CNOT gates
and single-qubit rotations [15]. Arbitrary two qubit-gates have
been also implemented using ion traps [16] and quantum dots
[17].
Circuit B has a unit-cell comprising all the possible con-
trolled one-qubit rotations among a set of qubits, comple-
mented with a set of single qubit rotations at the beginning
and at the end of the unit-cell, as shown in Figure 3b for the
four-qubit case. We start considering the rotations controlled
by the ﬁrst qubit, followed by the rotations controlled by the
second qubit and so on. Accordingly, our second model com-
prises 3n(n−1)+6n training parameters per unit-cell and can
be implemented in state of the art quantum hardware using
the standard decomposition of controlled unitaries into two
CNOT gates and single-qubit rotations [18]. This model is
also general and can be modiﬁed by adding constraints to the
parameters. For instance, one could consider the initial and
ﬁnal layers of rotations to be all the same.
Once the circuit model has been chosen, we must train the
network by maximizing the autoencoder cost function Eq. (7),
in close analogy to classical autoencoders. Our training pro-
cedure adopts a quantum-classical hybrid scheme in which
the state preparation and measurement are performed on the
quantum computer while the optimization is realized via an
optimization algorithm running on a classical computer. Such
hybrid schemes have been proposed in the context of quan-
tum machine learning [19, 20] and variational algorithms for
quantum simulation [21–24]. In the later case, several ex-
perimental demonstrations have been successfully carried out
[1, 21, 25].
As described in Section II, the cost function of the quantum
autoencoder is deﬁned as the weighted average of ﬁdelities
between the trash state produced by the compression, and the
reference state. These ﬁdelities can be measured via a SW AP
test [26] between the reference state and the trash state. Ac-
cordingly, our quantum register must comprise the input state,
|ψi⟩, and the reference state. In a single iteration of our train-
ing algorithm, we perform the following steps for each of the
states in the training set:
4
Figure 4. Schematic representation of the hybrid scheme for training
a quantum autoencoder. After preparation of the input state, |ψi⟩,
the state is compressed by the application of the parameterized uni-
tary, U⃗ p. The overlap between the reference state and the trash state
produced by the compression is measured via a SW AP test. The re-
sults for all the states in the training set are collected to compute the
cost function that is minimized using a classical optimization algo-
rithm. The process is repeated until achieving convergence on the
cost function and/or the values of the parameters,⃗ p= (p1, p2,... ).
Figure 5. Graphical representation of Hilbert space compression.
Given that the states of interest have support on only a subset S of
the Hilbert space (gray pieces), the quantum autoencoder ﬁnds an
encoding that uses a space of size|S|.
1. Prepare the input state,|ψi⟩, and the reference state. We
assume these preparations to be efﬁcient.
2. Evolve under the encoding unitary, U⃗ p, where ⃗ pis the
set of parameters at a given optimization step.
3. Measure the ﬁdelity between the trash state and the ref-
erence state via a SW AP test.
With the estimates of all the ﬁdelities, the cost function
(Eq. (7)) is computed and fed into a classical optimization rou-
tine that returns a new set of parameters for our compression
circuit. These steps are repeated until the optimization algo-
rithm converges. Given that the value of the cost function is
upper bounded by 1, we performed the optimization by min-
imizing the value of the function log10 (1−C2). This pro-
cedure is widely used in machine learning applications and
helps prevent numerical instabilities [27]. A graphical sum-
mary of the hybrid scheme for training a quantum autoencoder
is shown in Figure 4.
Figure 6. Potential energy surface for the hydrogen molecule using
a STO-6G basis set. The ground states at the red dots where used as
training set for the quantum autoencoder. The ground states at the
blue dots were used for testing.
IV . APPLICATION TO QUANTUM SIMULATION
Consider a set of states, {|ψi⟩}, with support on a subset
of a Hilbert space S ⊂ H. Using a quantum autoencoder,
we could ﬁnd an encoding scheme that employs only log2|S|
qubits to represent the states instead of log2|H|, with a trash
state of size log2|H−S| . This idea is graphically depicted in
Figure 5. This situation is usually encountered for eigenstates
of many-body systems due to special symmetries.
Fermionic wavefunctions, for instance, are eigenfunctions
of the particle number operator, same as the fermionic state
vectors. Consequently, an eigenstate of a system withη parti-
cles is spanned exclusively by the subspace of fermionic state
vectors with the same number of particles [28], that has size(N
η
)
withN the number of fermionic modes. This result has
direct implications for the design of quantum algorithms for
simulation, suggesting that the number of qubits required to
store fermionic wavefunctions could be reduced up tolog
(N
η
)
if an appropriate mapping can be found. The same situation
is encountered for the spin projection operator, thus reducing
the size of the subspace spanning a speciﬁc fermionic wave-
function even further.
Generally, the number of particles of the system is part of
the input when ﬁnding eigenstates of many-body systems. In
quantum chemistry simulations, the spin projection of the tar-
get state is also known. Many classical algorithms for simu-
lating quantum systems take advantage of these constraints to
reduce their computational cost [28]. However, the standard
transformations employed to map fermionic systems to qubits,
namely the Bravyi-Kitaev (BK) and the Jordan-Wigner (JW)
mappings [29, 30], do not exploit these symmetries and thus
employ more qubits than formally needed.
In this scenario, a quantum autoencoder could be trained
to compress fermionic wavefunctions obtained using a quan-
tum simulation algorithm that has been run using the standard
transformations. The compression schemes obtained through
this procedure could be employed to reduce the use of quan-
5
tum memory, if the wavefunction needs to be stored. It also
could save quantum resources for the simulation of systems
with similar symmetries. To illustrate this idea, we simulated
a quantum autoencoder applied to molecular wavefunctions.
Within the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, the non-
relativistic molecular Hamiltonian can be written as
H =hnuc +
∑
pq
hpqa†
paq + 1
2
∑
pqrs
hpqrsa†
pa†
qaras (8)
wherehnuc corresponds to the classical electrostatic repulsion
between nuclei, and the constantshpq andhpqrs correspond to
the one- and two-electron integrals (see Appendix A). The
operators a†
p and ap creates and annihilates an electron in
the spin-orbital p. After applying either the JW or the BK
transformation, the molecular Hamiltonian can be expressed
asH = ∑M
i ciHi, with M scaling as O(N 4). In this case,
the operators Hi correspond to tensor products of Pauli ma-
trices and the real coefﬁcientci are linear combinations of the
one- and two-electron integrals. For a ﬁxed set of nuclei and a
given number of electrons, the molecular integrals as well as
the coefﬁcients ci are functions of the internal coordinates of
the molecule, ⃗R.
For instance, consider the Hamiltonian of molecular hydro-
gen in the STO-6G minimal basis set [28]. Using the JW
transformation, the corresponding Hamiltonian acting on four
qubits adopts the generic form [29]:
H =c0I +c1(Z0 +Z1) +c2(Z2 +Z3) +c3Z0Z1+
c4(Z0Z2 +Z1Z3) +c5(Z1Z2 +Z0Z3) +c6Z2Z3
+c7(Y0X1X2Y3−X0X1Y2Y3−Y0Y1X2X3 +X0Y1Y2X3)
(9)
In this case, the coefﬁcients ci are a function of the inter-
nuclear distance, r. By solving the Schr ¨odinger equation for
the Hamiltonians at different values of r, we can obtain the
ground state energy for molecular hydrogen and construct the
potential energy surface (PES) shown in Figure 6. We expect
that the ground state wavefunctions along the PES conserve
the same number of particles and projection spin symmetries,
turning this set of states into an excellent target for compres-
sion.
To illustrate the previous idea, we classically simulated a
quantum autoencoder taking six ground states of the hydro-
gen molecule at different values of r,{|Ψ(ri)⟩}6
i=1, as our
training set. In this case, the weights of the states are chosen
to be all equal. In real applications, we can imagine that the
ground states are obtained using a quantum algorithm such as
the quantum variational eigensolver [21]. We trained the cir-
cuit model described in Figure 3 to compress the training set
of four-qubit states to two qubits and to one qubit, using|0⟩⊗2
and|0⟩⊗3 as reference states, respectively. Once the circuits
were trained we tested them on 44 ground states correspond-
ing to values ofr different from those of the training set. This
selection of the training and testing sets is shown in Figure 6.
The classical simulation was performed using a Python
script supplemented with the QuTiP library [31, 32]. To sim-
ulate general two-qubit gates we employed the decomposition
described in Ref.[16]. Arbitrary single-qubit rotations were
Table I. Average ﬁdelity (F) error after one cycle of compression and
decompression using the quantum autoencoder trained from ground
states of the Hydrogen molecule. We also report the error in the
energy of the decoded state. (Maximum and minimum errors shown
within parenthesis). 6 states were used for training and 44 more were
used for testing. These results were obtained with the L-BFGS-B
optimization.
Circuit Final size
(# qubits)
Set − log10(1−F )
MAE
-log10 Energy
MAE
(Hartrees)
Model 2 Training 6.96(6.82-7.17) 6.64(6.27-7.06)
A 2 Testing 6.99(6.81-7.21) 6.76(6.18-7.10)
1 Training 6.92(6.80-7.07) 6.60(6.23-7.05)
1 Testing 6.96(6.77-7.08) 6.72(6.15-7.05)
Model 2 Training 6.11(5.94-6.21) 6.00(5.78-6.21)
B 2 Testing 6.07(5.91-6.21) 6.03(5.70-6.21)
1 Training 3.95(3.53-5.24) 3.74(3.38-4.57)
1 Testing 3.81(3.50-5.38) 3.62(3.35-4.65)
∗ MAE: Mean Absolute Error. Log chemical accuracy in Hartrees ≈-2.80
Figure 7. A plot of the cost function versus the number of cost func-
tion evaluations during the training process. This example corre-
sponds to a quantum autoencoder for compression of wavefunction
of H 2 from 4 to 2 qubits using circuit A with a training set of six
ground states. We compared the L-BFGS-B and the Basin-Hopping
algorithms for optimization.
implemented by decomposing them into Pauli-Z and Pauli-Y
rotations,R =Rz(θ1)Ry(θ2)Rz(θ3), ignoring global phases
[18]. The optimization was performed using the SciPy im-
plementation of the Basin-Hopping (BS) algorithm [33]. We
also employed the L-BFGS-B method [34] with a numeri-
cal gradient (central ﬁnite difference formula with step size
h = 10−8). In the optimization of both circuit models, the pa-
rameters were constrained to the range [0, 4π). The optimiza-
tion of each circuit was initialized by setting the parameters to
randomly selected values.
Table I shows the average error in the ﬁdelities and the en-
ergies obtained after a cycle of compression and decompres-
sion through the optimal quantum autoencoder. We observe
that both circuit models are able to achieve high ﬁdelities for
6
the encoding, producing decoded wavefunctions with energies
that are close to the original values within chemical accuracy
(1kcal/mol≡ 1.6× 10−3 Hartrees ≡ 43.4 meV). This accu-
racy requirement assures that quantum chemistry predictions
have enough quality to be used for the estimation of thermo-
chemical properties such as reaction rates [35].
Figure 7 illustrates the optimization process of a quan-
tum autoencoder. We compared two different optimization
algorithms, L-BFGS-B and Basin-Hopping. The parameters
were initialized at random and the same guess was employed
for both optimizations. As observed in Figure 7, both algo-
rithms required a similar number of cost function evaluations
to achieve similar precision and exhibit a monotonic reduction
of the difference between the cost function and its ideal value
with the number of function evaluations. The implementation
of the quantum autoencoder in state of the art architectures
can beneﬁt from the use of algorithms that do not require gra-
dient evaluations and have a larger tolerance to the presence
of noise in the hardware, such as Basin-Hopping.
To gain insight into the compression process, we plotted the
density matrices of the compressed states and compared them
with the density matrix of the original state in Figure 8, for
three different values of r. The sparsity of the original input
density matrix is due to the symmetry of the Hamiltonian for
molecular hydrogen, whose eigenvectors have support on only
2 computational basis states, allowing for a compression up to
a single qubit. Although the quantum autoencoder achieves
high ﬁdelity with both types of circuit, the structure of the
density matrices indicates that the forms of the compressed
space and therefore the forms of the encoding unitaries differ
between the two circuit models. As the values ofr change, the
relation between the features of the input space, here repre-
sented by the elements of the density matrix, and the features
of the compressed space become apparent.
In addition to the example of molecular hydrogen, we tested
the autoencoder compression scheme with ground states of the
Hubbard model and the H 4 molecule. We considered half-
ﬁlled Hubbard models with 2-sites and 4-sites arranged in
a two-leg ladder (2×1 and 2×2 lattices, respectively). The
Hamiltonian for these systems is given by
H =−t
∑
<i,j>
∑
σ
a†
i,θaj,σ +U
∑
i
a†
i,↑ai,↑a†
i,↓ai,↓ (10)
wherea†
i,θ andai,σ create and annihilate an electron at site i
with spinσ, respectively. The summation in the ﬁrst term runs
over all the interacting sites, denoted as <i,j> . We used pe-
riodic boundary conditions along the horizontal direction and
open boundary conditions in the vertical direction. As in the
case of molecular Hamiltonians, Hubbard Hamiltonians can
be mapped to qubits using either the JW or the BK transfor-
mation, requiring two qubits per site.
We trained the two circuits of Figure 3 to compress the
ground states of the Hubbard Hamiltonians obtained by set-
tingt to six different values equally spaced between 0.9 and
1.1, with U = 2.0. The optimization process was repeated
three times starting at randomly selected values. The same
procedure was applied to the ground states of the H 4 system
at six different values of the bond distance d (0.6, 1.4, 2.2,
Table II. Final error in the cost function (Eq. (7)) obtained after train-
ing a quantum autoencoder for compression of the ground states of
two-sites and four-sites Hubbard models and the H 4 molecule along
a parallel path. Six ground states were used for training each system.
These results were obtained with the L-BFGS-B optimization.
Circuit System Compression rate∗
no→nl
− log10(1−C2)
Model Hubbard 4 → 3 7.52
A 2x1 sites 4 → 2 1.15
4→ 1 1.13
Hubbard 8 → 7 2.28
2x2 sites 8 → 6 1.42
H4 8→ 7 1.53
8→ 6 1.6
Model Hubbard 4 → 3 6.82
B 2x1 sites 4 → 2 3.92
4→ 1 4.02
Hubbard 8 → 7 2.29
2x2 sites 8 → 6 2.31
H4 8→ 7 4.33
8→ 6 1.15
∗ no and nl stand for the number of qubits in the original register
and the number of qubits in the latent space, respectively.
3.0, 3.8 and 4.6 atomic units) for the geometry described in
Figure 9.
Table II shows the lowest errors obtained for the compres-
sion of the Hubbard models and the H 4 system. Errors are
quantiﬁed as the difference between the ﬁnal value of the cost
function (Eq. (7)) and the ideal value of 1. Recall that the cost
function corresponds to the average ﬁdelity over the training
set. We observe that the ground states of the two-sites Hub-
bard model can be compressed from 4 to 3 qubits using both
circuit types. However, only circuit B is able to compress
these these states from 4 to 2 qubits and 4 to 1 qubits with
an error below 10−3. The same circuit-type achieves an error
smaller than 10−4 when compressing the ground states of the
H4 system from 8 to 7 qubits. In contrast, circuit A is unable
to obtain errors below 10−3 for H4. In the case of the 4-sites
Hubbard model, none of the circuit models proposed here was
able to obtain errors below 10−3.
The differences between the performances of the two circuit
models described above exempliﬁes how the ansatz employed
for the autoencoder unitary impacts the degree of compres-
sion achievable with the autoencoder model. Compression of
a particular set of states could be achieved more easily with
a dedicated ansatz designed for that purpose. One form of
unitary that can serve as a template to design such dedicated
ansatzes is given by the expression
U(⃗ α) =e−i ∑
iαiHi (11)
where the real numbersαi are the parameters for optimization
and the terms Hi are local interactions consisting of tensor
products of Pauli matrices. The experimental implementation
7
r = 0.75 ˚A r = 1.50 ˚A r = 2.50 ˚A
Input space
(4 qubits)
Latent space (A)
(2 qubits)
Latent space (B)
(2 qubits)
Latent space (A)
(1 qubit)
Latent space (B)
(1 qubit)
Figure 8. Visualization of the input space and the latent (compressed) spaces for three different testing instances of the H 2 compression,
corresponding to three different bond distances, r. The input and latent spaces are characterized as the density matrices of the input and
compressed states. Letters (A) and (B) denote the type of circuit employed to construct the encoding unitary. The size of the register (in
qubits) appears within parenthesis. Integer labels starting at 1 denote the computational basis states in ascending order from |00··· 0⟩ to
|11··· 1⟩.
of Eq. (11) would beneﬁt from the techniques developed for
quantum simulation algorithms [36].
Finally, we point out that the maximum rate of lossless
compression achievable with a quantum autoencoder is pre-
determined by the size of the subspace spanning the train-
ing set. Consequently, a given set of states might only ad-
mit a small or null compression rate. For instance, consider a
fermionic system with 8 fermionic modes and 4 particles, such
as a half-ﬁlled 4-sites Hubbard model or the H 4 molecule in
a minimal basis set studied here. Based solely on the con-
8
Figure 9. H4 molecule in a parallel conﬁguration, with the hydrogen
atoms forming a rectangle. We obtained the ground states of this
system at different values of d, with the bond distance in the two
hydrogen molecules ﬁxed to 2 atomic units (a.u.).
strain in the number of particles, these 8-qubits systems could
be compressed to log2
(8
4
)
≈ 7 qubits. Compression beyond
this point could be achieved if an extra symmetry constraint
is present. In general, we expect fermionic systems where the
number of fermionic modes is considerably larger than the
number of particles to be good candidates for compression.
V . DISCUSSION
We have introduced a general model for a quantum autoen-
coder – a quantum circuit augmented with learning via classi-
cal optimization – and have shown that it is capable of learn-
ing a unitary circuit which can facilitate compression of quan-
tum data, particularly in the context of quantum simulations.
We imagine that the model can have other applications, such
as compression protocols for quantum communication, error-
correcting circuits, or perhaps to solve particular problems di-
rectly. A natural application for quantum autoencoders is state
preparation. Once a quantum autoencoder has been trained to
compress a speciﬁc set of states, the decompression unitary
(U†) can be used to generate states similar to those originally
used for training. This is achieved by preparing a state of the
form|ΨI⟩⊗| a⟩ and evolving it underU†, where|ΨI⟩ has the
size of the latent space and|a⟩ is the reference state used for
training.
Autoencoders as state preparation tools have direct applica-
tion in the context of quantum variational algorithms [21–24].
These algorithms approximate the energy or the time evolu-
tion of an eigenstate by performing measurements on a quan-
tum state prepared according to a parameterized ansatz. A
quantum autoencoder could be trained with states of size no
qubits, obtained from a given ansatz, and later be used as a
state preparation tool as described above. Because the au-
toencoder parameters are ﬁxed after training, the only active
parameters in the variational algorithm would be those asso-
ciated to the preparation of a state in the latent space ( nl).
Sincenl <n o, the state preparation with autoencoders would
require fewer parameters than the original ansatz.
In our speciﬁcation of the autoencoder, we deﬁne the input
states to be an ensemble of pure states, and the evolution of
those states to be unitary. The most generalized picture of the
autoencoder, however, would allow for inputs to be ensem-
bles of mixed states and the set {U⃗ p} to be a set of quantum
channels. In the case of mixed state inputs, we remark that
this formulation can in principle be captured by our model al-
ready. More speciﬁcally, one can consider the case where a
set of ancillas (denoted A′) representing a puriﬁcation of the
mixed state is input into the autoencoder along with the origi-
nal input. Ulhmann’s theorem [8] guarantees that there exists
a puriﬁcation whose ﬁdelity is identical to that of the mixed
state generated from tracing out the puriﬁcation; namely, it is
a maximum over a unitary V acting on the puriﬁcation alone
(although ﬁnding this unitary can be a difﬁcult computational
problem itself). Consider then the encodingU⃗ p
AB⊗VA′, where
the original latent space is expanded to contain all of A′ (i.e.
none of the ancilla qubits are traced out). This puriﬁed sys-
tem will recover the behavior of the mixed system. The au-
toencoder structure as deﬁned here cannot completely capture
the structure for general quantum channels, though we expect
other computational tasks may be solved by considering spe-
ciﬁc channel instances.
Are there any obvious limitations to the quantum autoen-
coder model? One consideration is that the von-Neumann en-
tropy [8] of the density operator representing the ensemble
{pi,|ψi⟩AB} limits the number of qubits to which it can be
noiselessly compressed. However, ﬁnding the entropy of this
density operator is not trivial – in fact, given a circuit that con-
structs a density operator ρ, it is known that, in general, even
estimating the entropy ofρ is QSZK-complete [37]. This then
opens the possibility for quantum autoencoders to efﬁciently
give some estimate of the entropy of a density operator. In a
similar vein, the unitary of the autoencoder could be deﬁned to
include the action of a quantum channel, and the autoencoder
used to give both an encoding for and some lower bound for
the capacity of a quantum communication channel (although
the trash state may no longer be useful for training the autoen-
coder in some of these cases).
It is natural to consider whether the quantum autoencoder
structure we have deﬁned is actually a generalization of its
classical counterpart, as in the construction of [7]. It may cer-
tainly be possible that some particular family of unitaries, to-
gether with certain choices for n and k, can be constructed
so that a mapping exists. However, it is unclear that such a
correspondence would even be desirable. Rather, we believe
the value of autoencoders in general lies in the relatively sim-
ple structure of forcing a network to preserve information in a
smaller subspace, as we have deﬁned here.
Another topic of interest for any quantum computing model
is the computational complexity exhibited by the device. For
our construction, it is clear that any complexity result would
be dependent upon the family of unitaries that is chosen for the
learning to be optimized over. As the training itself is based
on classical optimization algorithms (with no clear ‘optimal’
learning method), this further obfuscates general statements
regarding the complexity of the model.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Yudong Cao, Peter John-
son, Ian Kivlichan, Nicolas Sawaya, Libor Veis, and Dominic
9
Berry for very insightful discussions and suggestions. JR and
AAG acknowledge the Air Force Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research
for support under Award: FA9550-12-1-0046. AA-G and JO
acknowledge support from the Vannevar Bush Faculty Fel-
lowship program sponsored by the Basic Research Ofﬁce of
the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineer-
ing and funded by the Ofﬁce of Naval Research through grant
N00014-16-1-2008. AA-G acknowledges the Army Research
Ofﬁce under Award: W911NF-15-1-0256. The authors thank
the Harvard Odyssey cluster facility where the numerical sim-
ulations presented in this work were carried out.
Appendix A: Molecular integrals
Using atomic units, where the electron mass me, the elec-
tron charge e, Bohr radius a0, Coulomb’s constant and ℏ are
unity, we can write the nuclear repulsion, hnuc, and one-
electron and two-electron integrals,hpq andhpqrs, as
hpq =
∫
dσϕ∗
p(σ)
(
−∇2
⃗ r
2 −
∑
i
Zi
|⃗Ri−⃗ r|
)
ϕq(σ) (A1)
hpqrs =
∫
dσ1dσ2
ϕ∗
p(σ1)ϕ∗
q(σ2)ϕs(σ1)ϕr(σ2)
|⃗ r1−⃗ r2| (A2)
hnuc = 1
2
∑
i̸=j
ZiZj
|⃗Ri− ⃗Rj|
(A3)
WhereZi represents the nuclear charge,⃗ rand ⃗R denote elec-
tronic and nuclear spatial coordinates, respectively, and σ is
now a spatial and spin coordinate with σi = (⃗ ri;si). Sum-
mations run over all nuclei. ϕ(σ) represent the spin-orbitals
(one-electron functions), that are generally obtained from a
self-consistent ﬁeld (SCF) Hartree-Fock (HF) calculation.
[1] P. J. J. O’Malley, R. Babbush, I. D. Kivlichan, J. Romero, J. R.
McClean, R. Barends, J. Kelly, P. Roushan, A. Tranter, N. Ding,
et al., Phys. Rev. X 6, 031007 (2016).
[2] A. Aspuru-Guzik, A. D. Dutoi, P. J. Love, and M. Head-
Gordon, Science 309, 1704 (2005).
[3] C.-Y . Liou, J.-C. Huang, and W.-C. Yang, Neurocomputing71,
3150 (2008).
[4] C.-Y . Liou, W.-C. Cheng, J.-W. Liou, and D.-R. Liou, Neuro-
computing 139, 84 (2014).
[5] J. Biamonte, P. Wittek, N. Pancotti, P. Rebentrost, N. Wiebe,
and S. Lloyd, arXiv preprint quant-ph/1611.09347 (2016).
[6] R. G ´omez-Bombarelli, D. Duvenaud, J. M. Hern´andez-Lobato,
J. Aguilera-Iparraguirre, T. D. Hirzel, R. P. Adams, and
A. Aspuru-Guzik, arXiv preprint cs.LG/1610.02415 (2016).
[7] K. H. Wan, O. Dahlsten, H. Kristj ´ansson, R. Gardner, and
M. Kim, arXiv preprint cs.AI/1612.00104 (2016).
[8] M. M. Wilde, Quantum Information Theory (Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2012).
[9] V . Shende, S. Bullock, and I. Markov, IEEE Transactions on
Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems25,
1000 (2006).
[10] N. Datta, J. M. Renes, R. Renner, and M. M. Wilde, IEEE
Transactions on Information Theory 59, 8057 (2013).
[11] F. Dupuis, M. Berta, J. Wullschleger, and R. Renner, Commun.
Math. Phys. 328, 251284 (2014).
[12] P. B. Sousa and R. V . Ramos, arXiv preprint quant-ph/0602174
(2006).
[13] A. Daskin, A. Grama, G. Kollias, and S. Kais, J. Chem. Phys
137, 234112 (2012).
[14] R. Barends, J. Kelly, A. Megrant, A. Veitia, D. Sank, E. Jeffrey,
T. C. White, J. Mutus, A. G. Fowler, Y . Campbell Chen, et al.,
Nature 508, 500 (2014).
[15] B. Kraus and J. Cirac, Phys. Rev. A 63, 062309 (2001).
[16] D. Hanneke, J. Home, J. Jost, J. Amini, D. Leibfried, and
D. Wineland, Nat. Phys. 6, 13 (2010).
[17] M. Veldhorst, C. Yang, J. Hwang, W. Huang, J. Dehollain,
J. Muhonen, S. Simmons, A. Laucht, F. Hudson, K. M. Itoh,
et al., Nature 526, 410 (2015).
[18] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and
Quantum Information (Cambridge University Press, 2010).
[19] S. Gammelmark and K. Mølmer, New. J. Phys 11, 033017
(2009).
[20] J. Bang, J. Ryu, S. Yoo, M. Pawłowski, and J. Lee, New. J. Phys
16, 073017 (2014).
[21] A. Peruzzo, J. McClean, P. Shadbolt, M.-H. Yung, X.-Q. Zhou,
P. J. Love, A. Aspuru-Guzik, and J. L. O’Brien, Nat. Commun.
5, 4213 (2014).
[22] J. R. McClean, J. Romero, R. Babbush, and A. Aspuru-Guzik,
New. J. Phys 18, 023023 (2016).
[23] D. Wecker, M. B. Hastings, and M. Troyer, Phys. Rev. A 92,
042303 (2015).
[24] Y . Li and S. C. Benjamin, arXiv preprint quant-ph/1611.09301
(2016).
[25] R. Santagati, J. Wang, A. Gentile, S. Paesani, N. Wiebe, J. Mc-
Clean, S. Short, P. Shadbolt, D. Bonneau, J. Silverstone, et al.,
arXiv preprint quant-ph/1611.03511 (2016).
[26] H. Buhrman, R. Cleve, J. Watrous, and R. De Wolf, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 87, 167902 (2001).
[27] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (In-
formation Science and Statistics) (Springer-Verlag New York,
Inc., Secaucus, NJ, USA, 2006), ISBN 0387310738.
[28] T. Helgaker, J. Olsen, and P. Jorgensen, Molecular Electronic
Structure Theory (Wiley, 2013).
[29] J. T. Seeley, M. J. Richard, and P. J. Love, J. Chem. Phys. 137,
224109 (2012).
[30] A. Tranter, S. Soﬁa, J. Seeley, M. Kaicher, J. McClean, R. Bab-
bush, P. V . Coveney, F. Mintert, F. Wilhelm, and P. J. Love,
International Journal of Quantum Chemistry 115, 1431 (2015).
[31] J. Johansson, P. Nation, and F. Nori, Comput. Phys. Commun
183, 1760 (2012).
10
[32] J. Johansson, P. Nation, and F. Nori, Comput. Phys. Commun
184, 1234 (2013).
[33] D. J. Wales and J. P. Doye, J. Phys. Chem. A 101, 5111 (1997).
[34] R. H. Byrd, P. Lu, J. Nocedal, and C. Zhu, SIAM. J. Sci. Com-
put 16, 1190 (1995).
[35] K. A. Peterson, D. Feller, and D. A. Dixon, Theor. Chem. Acc.
131, 1 (2012).
[36] I. Georgescu, S. Ashhab, and F. Nori, Rev. Mod. Phys. 86, 153
(2014).
[37] A. Ben-Aroya and A. Ta-Shma, arXiv preprint quant-
ph/0702129 (2007).